---
layout: post
title: Moral Law
tags:
- art of war
- car accidents
- insurance
- insurance certificate
- moral law
- present danger
- sun tzu
- traffic citation
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _edit_last: '1'
  _yoast_wpseo_linkdex: '82'
  _yoast_wpseo_focuskw: moral law
  _yoast_wpseo_title: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_metadesc: Moral Law - Some time ago, I read Sun Tzu's The Art of War.
    When I read the book, one concept I remember distinctly is what he calls The Moral
    Law [1].
  _yoast_wpseo_meta-robots-noindex: '0'
  _yoast_wpseo_meta-robots-nofollow: '0'
  _yoast_wpseo_meta-robots-adv: none
  _yoast_wpseo_sitemap-include: ! '-'
  _yoast_wpseo_sitemap-prio: ! '-'
  _yoast_wpseo_canonical: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_redirect: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_opengraph-description: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_google-plus-description: ''
  dsq_thread_id: '800075831'
---
<em>Moral Law</em>

Some time ago, I read Sun Tzu's <em>The Art of War</em>. When I read the book, one concept I remember distinctly is what he calls <em>The Moral Law </em>[1]. As he describes it, moral law is the capacity of an army to follow a general's orders, regardless of their lives and any present danger. This made a lot of sense to me - a warrior ought to fight most valiantly for what he/she believes is right and should win.

I believe that Sun Tzu's <em>Moral Law</em> is also very relevant to our ordinary lives. My interpretation of it is that in your own life you can only really fight for something that you intrinsically believe is right. Conversely, you should never fight for a cause you do not believe is right.

<em>Car Accidents</em>

I've been involved in two car accidents (just my luck) and have noticed this simple law to be true:

1\.

I was rear-ended while making a right turn. The other driver was so far away that he wasn't even close to the intersection when I made the turn; however, he was going so fast that he hit me after I had cleared the intersection. When we exchanged insurance information, he wasn't carrying his driver's license (I really, really should have called the police!). So lieu of that, he handed me a traffic citation which had on it his driver's license number. I also recorded his insurance information and photographed it.

Weeks after reporting the claim with the insurance company and giving my recorded statement, I received a strange letter in the mail from the Claims Representative. The letter informed me that "our insured's policy does not extend coverage for this loss". Eventually, I was able to find out from the insurance company (these guys don't like to tell you much, they're liable for it) that he had actually cancelled his policy with the company and had therefore given me an invalid insurance certificate.

With some help, I was finally able to track down his real insurance company and file a claim with them. The claim is still ongoing as his insurance company is refusing to admit liability.

2.

I backed into another car in the parking lot. The driver wasn't in the car when I hit it, so I went inside to find him and let him know that I had hit his car. We exchanged emails / phone numbers and ultimately I handed him a check to cover the damage to his car.

<em>Drive Safely</em>

One of these situations involves a fight that has and will continue to be very costly for me to fight in terms of my time (I will take it to small claims court if I need to). However, I have been fighting it and will continue to do so.

The other situation is never worth fighting.
