---
layout: post
title: Ambition
tags:
- attitude
- chinese culture
- consequence
- mediocrity
- personal ambitions
- success story
- swings
- visions of the future
- young person
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _yoast_wpseo_linkdex: '84'
  _edit_last: '1'
  dsq_thread_id: '797866570'
  _yoast_wpseo_focuskw: ambition
  _yoast_wpseo_title: Ambition
  _yoast_wpseo_metadesc: ! 'A friend and I were sharing our personal ambitions. He
    asked me: "What if nothing you''ve planned for ends up working out?'
  _yoast_wpseo_meta-robots-noindex: '0'
  _yoast_wpseo_meta-robots-nofollow: '0'
  _yoast_wpseo_meta-robots-adv: none
  _yoast_wpseo_sitemap-include: ! '-'
  _yoast_wpseo_sitemap-prio: ! '-'
  _yoast_wpseo_canonical: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_redirect: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_opengraph-description: ''
  _yoast_wpseo_google-plus-description: ''
---
Some time ago, a friend and I were sharing our personal ambitions and visions of the future. In the midst of our conversation, he suddenly asked me: "What if nothing you've planned for ends up working out? What would you do then?"

Upon hearing this, all I could do was to stare blankly at him. The question had simply never occurred to me; I was thus, wholly unprepared to answer it. The best reply I could manage was that "if I'm dogged enough, I'll somehow find a way to make things work". Yet even as I said it, I could feel that my answer was wrong somehow.

The question has since been bubbling in the back of my head for some time now and I've given more thought to an answer:
<ul>
	<li>In spite of everything, it is by far and away the most likely outcome that when a young person reaches mid-life, they will be nothing like the person they aspired to be in their youth.</li>
	<li>Ultimately, this person may realize none of their ambitions and spend the majority of later life faded into mediocrity. For every breakout success story, many other equally motivated but less fortunate others will fall into this category. That is just life (or, if you prefer, the consequence of probability).</li>
	<li>Most importantly, this does not mean that one should be less driven or abstain from pursuing their ambitions. On the contrary, one should strive boldly for their beliefs, yet accept the consequences (good or bad) peacefully and in full honesty [1].</li>
</ul>
Much of life's meaning comes not from our glorious triumphs, but rather from our resounding failures [2].

[1] This idea is not my own, but rather one borrowed from a friend and deeply rooted in Chinese culture and literature. As she describes, it's basic meaning (  ) is an indifference to fame or monetary interest. However, its meaning has evolved over thousands of years. Thus, one interpretation is what she describes as a "moderate positive life attitude": a tolerance for the swings and chaos that compose our modern life.

[2] I now believe that in many ways life is a quest for meaning. Again this idea is not my own, but rather one pioneered by humanistic psychologist Viktor Frankl. Frankl grew up around the same time and was influenced by many of the leading psychologists of the day, namely Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler. However, unlike the others (Freud = sex, Adler = power), he believed that humans are intrinsically motivated chiefly to pursue meaning in their lives.

Frankl's ideas were put to a test when he and his family were deported to Nazi concentration camps during WWII. Even in this absurdly dehumanized environment, he was able to continue upholding his beliefs and derive meaning from his suffering.

Although his entire extended family perished in the concentration camps, Frankl himself survived the war and went on to make many important contributions to religion and psychiatry. (<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viktor_Frankl">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viktor_Frankl</a>)

&nbsp;
